recipe: resources depending on authenticated user (#22)
octo-woapi/cookbook: recipes/resources-depending-on-authenticated-user.md

---
description: Should I expose resources depending on the user authenticated by an access token?
complexity: 2
---

# Resources depending on an authenticated user

## Use-case

> I expect my API to be used by a frontend, with a user already authenticated (generally by an OAuth2 access token).

Reviewer: Le use-case s'applique également à n'importe quel type de client (CLI, backend).

Author: j'ai reformulé !

_Can't do:_ you coupled your API endpoint with the ACL to be applied on the resource. An admin may comes with its own access token, but it will only contains its own id. It has no way to pass the required user id as a parameter.\
You would have to create a specific endpoint for the admin use case. It would be a shame, since being reusable for different clients is what APIs are all about.

**Flaw 2:** To improve my API performances, I would like to add some cache on top of it, for example using a CDN and the proper cache-control headers.

_Can't do:_ All the user profiles are retrieved under the same request, except for the access token. The cache service will not be able to distinguish them (unless you store the access token itself in the cache key, but you certainly don't want to do that!)

**Flaw 3:** This design is not affordant for a developer used to a classic REST design.\
Looking at the `GET /profile` resource, I expect the response to be always the same, as there is no clue indicating that the response depends on the access token. I would have to go through the doc to understand that.

> Having these limits in mind, what can we do?\

Reviewer: Il y a un antislash qui reste à la fin de la ligne

### Option 1: require explicit business parameters

All the previous flaws are caused because the `user id` is passed through the access token, even though it is a business parameter (the response content depends on it).

The simplest solution is to explicitly require all your business parameters, like for any other resource:\
For example, using `GET /profiles/:userId`

```shell
curl \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <alice_access_token>" \
https://api.example.com/v1/profiles/12345
```
```json
{
  "id": 12345,
  "username": "Alice"
}
```

So that you separate concerns:
- when the response of your endpoint depends on business parameters, they are explicitly requested in path parameters, query string or request body.
- when the right to access to your resource depends on the ACL of the user, they are enforced using the access token.

> This implies a slight constraint for the API Client: extract the user id from the access token (generally in the `sub` claim). But in most context, user id should be an information already known by the frontend.

Reviewer: Cela implique également que le backend vérifie le type d'utilisateur et s'il est autorisé à visualiser les données d'un autre utilisateur.

Author: bien vu, je rajoute la contrainte

### Option 2: show explicitly that the access token is used as a parameter

You may think that your API design is dedicated to a single frontend use, and not be afraid by the previous flaws.

In this case, it can makes sense to favour a flawless usage for your frontend, and offer a simpler way to access some of the authenticated user information.

But if you want do go this way, we strongly suggest to **make it explicit in the endpoint naming**, to avoid at least the non-affordance flaw.

A common way to expose such an endpoint is to use `/me` or `/@me` in the endpoint. A developer will be able to understand that this endpoint is about the authenticated user:

> - `GET /profile/@me`

Reviewer: Comme pour les exemples précédents, j'aurai bien mis un petit cURL

---
description: Should I expose resources depending on the user authenticated by an access token?
complexity: 2
---

# Resources depending on an authenticated user

## Use-case

> I expect my API to be called with an already authenticated user  (generally by an OAuth2 access token). This happens when the Client is a frontend, even if my API could also be used for server-to-server calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I expect my API to be called with an already authenticated user (usually by an OAuth2 access token). This happens when the Client is a frontend or any other backend service.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I expect my API to be called with an authenticated user (generally by an OAuth2 access token). This happens when the Client is a frontend, even if my API could also be used for server-to-server calls.
```

I want to retrieve data linked to the user, for example:
- user profile

> - list of user orders...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- list of user orders
- etc.
```

> How can I do that?\

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How can I do that?
```

Should I expose a simple `GET /profile` endpoint, that will use the access token to identify the user and retrieve its profile?

## Recipe

> Let's start with a _don't_: use the access token as a "parameter" of a regular endpoint is not a good idea.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's start with a _don't_

> using the access token as a implicit parameter of a regular endpoint is not a good idea.
```

Reviewer 4: je pense que le mot-clé _implicite_ est important pour raccrocher à des éléments connus de code smell.

Reviewer 2: a implicit -> an implicit

Let's assume we have this `GET /profile` endpoint.
It has no parameters, other than the access token expected in the `Authorization` header.

> The backend just extracts the user id from the access token, and use it as the parameter of the endpoint:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The backend will extract the user id from the access token, and use it as the parameter of the endpoint:
```

> With an access token belonging to Alice:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given an access token belonging to Alice:
```

```shell
curl \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <alice_access_token>" \
https://api.example.com/v1/profile
```
```json
{
  "username": "Alice"
}
```

Same call with an access token belonging to Bob:
```shell
curl \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <bob_access_token>" \
https://api.example.com/v1/profile
```
```json
{
  "username": "Bob"
}
```

> Seems pretty convenient, no? But what's wrong with this design?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Seems pretty convenient, right? But what's wrong with this design?
```
